So what is it?

Not much right now. It's a game I've spent plenty of time thinking about but only 2 months so far developing. Let's talk about what I want it to be.

In short it's a fantasy town simulator. It'll be part Dwarf Fortress, part Banished or Simcity, and part Majesty.

The emphasis will be on building a town while still making individuals in the town be important and unique. That is to say I want to support at least two main play styles. 1) The player who wants to build a thriving town in a vibrant, breathing fantasy environment. More interested in braving the wilds and the success of the town's economy than the minutiae of every individual citizen's life-happenings. 2) The player who wants to build a town so they can sit back and watch all the absurd, funny, amusing, tragic things that happen in their citizen's lives. 

As with any good simulation the emphasis will be on providing compelling emergent gameplay. That is the world will foster interesting and unique stories every time you play it. The game will feature mechanics complex enough to require mastery but not so complex as to be esoteric or impossible to understand.

So, what will make up the game? What defines it? What sets it apart from Dwarf Fortress, Spacebase DF9, Clockwork Empires, or Rimworld? 

The environment and context for one. I'm heavily inspired by Dungeons and Dragons, specifically I've been reading a whole lot of R.A. Salvatore, and playing Forgotten Realms games like Baldur's Gate and Icewind Dale. It would be very apt to say that I see this as a game about settling a town in a random corner of Faerûn or some other fantasy landscape, where conflict and danger exist around every corner. I see this as a game about hardship and difficulty, about simulating the excitement of what it would be like to be on the edge of civilization in a foreign and magical land.

So take the town building of Banished, zoom in the focus a bit so that every citizen has an interesting and varied life of their own like the Sims or Dwarf Fortress, and then add the odd orc raid. Or maybe you chose a location that happens to be in bear breeding territory. Maul Fest 2014. Or maybe a goblin decides to move into your town because he's not like the rest of his brutish kind. But your town is kind of full of dicks so they treat him like crap and it causes a big divide between villagers who are goblin-friends and those who are goblin haters. These are stories I want to see fostered by the game's mechanics.

Another way I plan to set the game apart is how I'm planning on tackling scope. A lot of these types of games limit your interaction to a smaller area. The reasons for this are varied I'm sure, but the one that comes to mind most is the difficulty of managing complexity of simulation on a large scale. That is to say, if I try to simulate the entire world, either a) your computer will crash and/or b) I'll never finish making the game. Now while I certainly will be limiting the actual playable area to a limited size, I plan on making up for this by simulating the world around you continuously even if you can't see it or explore it directly. Right now I'm calling this the macro vs. micro divide. Inside your playable area, I simulate everything: citizens getting hungry, working in the fields, sleeping in their beds, fighting in the tavern. Outside the playable area will not be irrelevant however. It will provide the context for your town. The game will simulate things in the outside world that will have an effect on your town. There will be traveling merchants, as well as denizens of the world interacting and conflicting with one another. Of these things, some you'll only hear about from visitors to your town, merchants and people who stay at your taverns, and some of it will affect you directly, like a caravan of goods you were expecting from a neighboring town that got raided by bandits mid route, or a tribe of goblins who come to raid your town for valuables.

<!-- I also mentioned Majesty as a source of inspiration. Majesty had a unique gameplay mechanic revolving around the creation of heroes to go around and do your dirty work, fighting monsters and protecting your kingdom. The key was that you lacked direct control over the heroes. They had their own personalities and prerogatives that dictated their actions in the world and the fun was in watching what they'd end up getting themselves into while simultaneously trying to lead them in a direction that would benefit your town. From this I take two things. 1) Similar to Dwarf Fortress, and almost all of games I mentioned earlier, the player will have no direct control over individual citizens in the town. The player instead influence and lead the citizens by assigning tasks and goals for the town as a whole. 2) -->

Apart of this "outside world" component, a key feature of the game will be populating the world with interesting characters that travel throughout it. I see this as a key thematic element in D&D games and stories, that of the traveling adventurer or merchant. While you're tasked with tending your town in your chosen corner of the world, you'll continuously be interacting with people who have their own goals and prerogatives and their own adventures. They'll have tales to tell in the tavern, news to pass on to you of the goings on in the world. Not only that but they'll be an important aspect of the economy. You need merchants to buy and sell goods to and you'll need adventurers to sell weapons to and buy powerful artifacts from. Perhaps they'll even decide to settle in your town. A veteran adventurer makes a useful head of the town guard, and even a failed adventurer who does nothing but complain and drink makes for an amusing town drunk.

There's more I can add here that I desire to implement in the game, but these are the core features of that I'm setting out to create.