---
layout: post
title: "Ignoring minified assets the right way √"
modified: 2014-06-17 20:51:30 -0500
categories: code
tags: [code, git, tricks]
image:
  feature: 
  credit: 
  creditlink: 
comments: 
share: 
---

Learned another neat git trick while working on getting this blog working (again). This one involves ignoring minified assets.

Normally the solution for ignoring minified assets would be to just add the file(s) to the `.gitignore` file for the project and be done with it. 
As you may well know, adding a file to the `.gitignore` file causes it to be, well, ignored by git. So next time you compile your css down to
`app.min.css` or what have you and do `$ git add -A` the file won't show up on the list of files that were updated.

Now this is all well and good in a situation where these minified assets are expected to be generated on a per developer basis or 
generated by a build script in a production server somewhere. What happens if you're running a blog like Jekyll where your setup
is too dumb to know to build minified assets to serve on the other end. Well this is exactly the problem I had. 

Now, I suppose I could have been smarter and dug around to figure out how to get Jekyll to do smart build procedures but really
my only complaint for having minified assets included in git was because my diffs would look like this:

{% highlight css %}
se,.mfp-iframe-holder .mfp-close{right:-6px;width:100%;padding-right:6px;color:white;text-align:right}.mfp-counter{position:absolute;top:0;right:0;font-siz
e:12px;line-height:18px;color:#ccc}.mfp-arrow{position:absolute;top:0;top:50%;width:90px;height:110px;padding:0;margin:0;margin-top:-55px;overflow:hidden;t
ext-indent:100%;white-space:nowrap;background-color:#111;opacity:.65;-webkit-transition:opacity .2s ease-in-out;-moz-transition:opacity .2s ease-in-out;-ms
-transition:opacity .2s ease-in-out;-o-transition:opacity .2s ease-in-out;transition:opacity .2s ease-in-out;-webkit-tap-highlight-color:rgba(0,0,0,0)}.mfp
-arrow:active{margin-top:-54px}.mfp-arrow:hover,.mfp-arrow:focus{opacity:1}.mfp-arrow:before,.mfp-arrow:after,.mfp-arrow .mfp-b,.mfp-arrow .mfp-a{position:
absolute;top:0;left:0;display:block;width:0;height:0;margin-top:35px;margin-left:35px;border:solid transparent;content:''}.mfp-arrow:after,.mfp-arrow .mfp-
a{top:8px;border-top-width:12px;border-bottom-width:12px;opacity:.8}.mfp-arrow:before,.mfp-arrow .mfp-b{border-top-width:20px;border-bottom-width:20px}.mfp
{% endhighlight %}


Utter garbage that I have to sift through to get through the other changes in my precious git diff.