---
layout: post
title:  "ECS More Like EZ...S"
date:   2016-12-30 12:00:01
categories: development
comments: true
image:
  feature: month-in-development-header.png
---

One of the biggest changes I glossed over fairly quickly in my [last blog post](/development/return-of-the-jedai/) was the introduction of the Entity Component System (ECS) pattern to Ripple's codebase. For this blog post I thought I'd dive in a little deeper into what the ECS pattern is and what my specific recipe for baking it into Ripple's code looks like.

<p class="note" markdown="1">While most of my blog posts are targetted at anyone who is interested in the game, this is a more technical post and will focus on programming architecture and implementation details.</p>

## What Is ECS?

### Composition Over Inheritance

At its core the ECS pattern boils down to ["composition over inheritance"](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Composition_over_inheritance). If you've ever taken a software architecture course or have been programming longer than a year it's a design principle you've probably ran into before. Basically whenever you rely heavily on inheritance trees, given enough changes, you'll end up in a situation where adding a new class will require refactoring large parts of the tree to allow it to fit into the heirarchy. In short, inheritance is often not very flexible.

<p class="note" markdown="1">If you're looking for a more a thorough overview of the ECS pattern I would take a look at the [Component chapter](http://gameprogrammingpatterns.com/component.html) from the wonderful [Game Programming Patterns](http://gameprogrammingpatterns.com/) book by Bob Nystrom.</p>

An example from Ripple was when I was thinking about adding a `StorageCart` class to the game. I already had a `Building` class which encompassed the functionality like storing items and being a constructible entity. But a cart should move right? Well buildings can't move but I had an `Agent` class, a parent class for monsters and people, that had this behavior. That means I would have to pull all of that functionality from both classes into a shared class that the `Building`, `Agent`, and `StorageCart` classes inherited from. This doesn't seem particularly elegant. Especially as you can imagine this situation arising over and over until you have a super bloated `EntityThatDoesEverything` top level class.

My halfway solution was to follow this "composition over inheritance" motto directly. If an entity needed storage functionality then it would have a storage property, `entity.storage`, which would be an instance of the `Storage` class. This class would encapsulate all of the functionality around storing items and could be attached to any other entity class.

Now at this point I started to convert pieces of functionality over to this format, where functionality was encompassed in classes that existed as instances of entities. But I realized by doing this I was essentially implementing a half-assed version of ECS. Bored and frustrated, I decided to go whole-ass with my solution and move everything to ECS.

### OK. But Really What Is ECS?

I mentioned you could separate out different pieces of functionality into different classes and then have those classes attached to your entities. If we did this with every piece of functionality what would our entity class be left with? A decrepit vessel for pointers, a husk floating through the void of code. Or maybe just an identifying piece of information, an id.

The core parts of the ECS framework are <small>surprise</small> Entities, Components, and Systems. And in ECS, this id *is* the entity. Components are raw data representing one piece of functionality (`MoveComponent`, `PoisonComponent`). Systems, which are tied to a specific type of Component, operate on each Component of their type every turn (`MoveSystem` operates on every `MoveComponent`).

### Ripple ECS Architecture

If you're not familiar with ECS that super brief into might have confused you but I figure it will be more illuminating to explain each piece as it exists in my implementation so I'm not repeating myself. So let's jump in.

#### Entities

The first pieces of the puzzle are entities, the most simple concept to grapple with. An entity in ECS is just an id with a number of components tied to it. When I say a component is tied to an entity's id I just mean, given the id, you can fetch any component for that entity. Think of it as a primary key in a database.

#### Components

Components are also very simple. They are just structs that represent an entity's state for a given piece of functionality. What does that mean? Well, let's look at an example.

```typescript
interface IHealthState {
    maxHealth: number;
    currentHealth: number;
}
```
This is the interface for the state of one of the simpler components in the Ripple codebase, the Health component. It contains all the relevant data for keeping track of an entity's health. In this case we just need to know current health and the max health. If you wanted to do damage to an entity you would fetch this component and decrement the `currentHealth` value. We'll get to the specifics of how that works in a bit.

You might be confused by the interface being called `IHealthState` instead of `IHealthComponent`. This is really an implementation detail. I decided to have components exist as wrapper objects with a reference to the actual state and then some extra metadata like the name of the component to make identifying them in code and while debugging a bit easier. Here's the full file for context to see what I'm talking about:

```typescript
import {IComponent} from '../entity-manager';
import {ComponentEnum} from '../component-enum';

export interface IHealthState {
    maxHealth: number;
    currentHealth: number;
}

export interface IHealthComponent extends IComponent {
    state: IHealthState;
}

export const Health: IHealthComponent = {
    name: 'health',
    enum: ComponentEnum.Health,
    state: {
        currentHealth: null,
        maxHealth: null
    }
};
```

And here's `IComponent`:
```typescript
export interface IComponent {
    enum: ComponentEnum;
    name: string;
    state: {[key: string]: any;}
}
```

#### Systems

So we have our entity ids and then component state objects, where do systems come in? As I said before a System is associated with a specific type of component and is in charge of performing any necessary updates on components of its given type. For instance you might have a `PoisonSystem` and a `PoisonComponent`. The `PoisonSystem` might check the `PoisonComponent` for an `isActive` flag and then decrement the health value for the entity every turn.

<p class="note" markdown="1">Not every component needs to have a system associated with it. A system only needs to exist if a given component requires an update to be fired every turn. For example, Health component I showed has no associated System in Ripple.</p>

In its most simple form a System might look like this:

```typescript
export class EntitySystem {
    update (entities: number[], turn?: number) {
        entities.forEach(entity => {
            // do stuff with entity every turn
        });
    };
}
```

Every turn the System has its `update` method called and is passed in the list of entities of its given type.

<p class="note" markdown="1">In my case I also pass in other things, like `turn` which is the current turn of iteration for the engine. This is useful for things like rendering things in time with the speed of the game.</p>

#### Assemblages

Well, we've gotten through the core pieces of the ECS pattern but I have some extra pieces that I've rolled into my implementation. The first of these are called Assemblages and are essentially templates for entity types.

First, a little context. Let's say we want to have a Ball entity with a Move component, so it bounces and changes position properly, a Render component, so it shows up on the screen correctly, and a Color component, so balls can be different colors.

When you'd construct a Ball entity you'd end up doing something like this:

```typescript
const ball: number = getEntityId();
createComponentForEntity(ball, Components.Move);
createComponentForEntity(ball, Components.Render);
createComponentForEntity(ball, Components.Color);
```

That means every time we create a ball we need to construct one of each of these three components. This is pretty tedious and it becomes even more tedious the more types of entities and components you add to the game. This is where assemblages come into play.

An assemblage really is just a list of components that make up a given entity to make spawning them easier. For our ball example it would look like this:

```typescript
const ballAssemblage = [
    Components.Move,
    Components.Render,
    Components.Color
];

// Now we can create a ball in two lines
const ball: number = getEntityId();
ballAssemblage.forEach(component => createComponentForEntity(ball, component));
```

#### Assemblage Data

Now we have an easy way to create entities of the same type in a jiffy, but what happens if we want to create entities of the same *type* but with different values for their components. With our ball example, we have a way to create a bunch of balls with assemblages very easily but how do we create a bunch of blue balls and a bunch of red balls just as easily?

First, let's lay out what the components look like and the api for creating components with state values already set:

```typescript
class ColorComponent extends Component {
    name = 'Color';
    color: string;
}

// Create a component with state values
createComponentForEntity(
    entityId: number,
    component: Component,
    state: any
): void;

// This call would create a ColorComponent for the ball with
// color set to "red"
createComponentForEntity(ball, Component.Color, { color: 'red' });
```

With that laid out, the solution is probably pretty obvious. We just need a way to map the values we desire our entities to be spawned with to the given components. And that's it.

```typescript
redBallAssemblageData = {
    Color: { color: 'red' }
};

// We can still create a red ball in a few lines
const ball: number = getEntityId();
ballAssemblage.forEach(component => {
    createComponentForEntity(
        ball,
        component,
        redBallAssemblageData[component.name]
    );
});
```

The key in the above code working is this:
```typescript
redBallAssemblageData[component.name]
```

Which relies on there being a way to tie the component from the assemblage's list of components to the matching data entry in the assemblage-data map. The `name` property on the `Component` interface fulfills just this purpose.

Of course the beauty of this is is you can define your various entities as plain old data-- JSON even, if you make sure to keep your component's state objects composed entirely of primitives.

#### Utils

Another requirement I discovered I had was a place to store methods that performed updates on components that wasn't tied to a specific System. For example there might be multiple components that update the position of an entity and that update might be complicated enough that you'd like to pull it out into a separate method for consistency. This is where I introduced the idea of Utils. These are basically just helper classes that can fetch data and update data specific to a type of Component. In this regard they are similar to Systems because they are tied to a specific Component e.g. `AgentComponent` -> `AgentUtil`.

Another use for Utils is for using more complicated data structures for your Components' state. Ideally Components should be made up of primitive data structures <small>[1]</small> and therefore if you want to use more advanced data structures you'll need a place to store that logic that exists outside the Components. Utils are a good spot for this functionality.

<small>1. I'll touch upon reasons for this in a bit.</small>

#### Entity Manager

The final piece of the puzzle with my specific implementation of ECS is the Entity Manager. This is, as it sounds, a class that manages all entities and all components. It provides an api to create components for an entity, get components for an entity, delete components for an entity, etc. It is also in charge of calling every system with the appropriate entities every turn.

### But How Do You Use It?

Those are a lot of pieces and it might be confusing how they come together. So far I've given some  small isolated examples so here's a couple more involved examples that should help paint a more concrete idea of how the architecture is used in practice.

#### Creating a villager in Ripple

The first example is how to create a villager in Ripple. Every call to create an entity begins with a method on the `EntityManager`. In this case that method is `createEntityFromAssemblage`. As previously mentioned this allows us to create an entity from a template or assemblage so that it will have the required components.

Next we have to initialize the entity with its specific component data using assemblage data. This is fairly simple and involves just a few steps of fetching components and then extending/merging their state values with the assemblage data.

What if we want to spawn a villager with a specific name or some other attribute? Well, just as easily we just merged in the assemblage data we would then merge the user's passed in component values to overwrite the assemblage data. This might look something like this:

```typescript
// This would be assemblage data
const defaultData = { eyeColor: 'blue', hair: 'red' };

// This would be passed in by the user making the call to spawn the
// entity with their desired component values
const specificData = { hair: 'brown', name: 'Chet Manley' };

const entityData = _.merge(defaultData, specificData);
// { eyeColor: 'blue', hair: 'brown', name: 'Chet Manley' }
```

Since a lot of this logic is repeated and most of the time you just want to spawn something of a given type with some basic data I pulled this code out into an `EntitySpawner` class with simple methods like `spawnBuilding(data: EntityData)`. 

#### How to move an entity on the screen

If you've read up till this point you probably have a pretty good idea of how to do this. All you need to do is fetch the component in charge of keeping track of an entity's position in game, let's say it's the `PositionComponent`, and then update the coordinates or `tile` of this component's state. But how does this result in the entity actually moving on the screen?

Well obviously this will differ from engine to engine, but from a high level it might go something like this:

1. Update the tile on the `PositionComponent` for the entity.

    ```typescript
    const positionState = getComponentForEntity(
        entity,
        Component.Position
    );
    positionState.tile = newTile;
    ```

2. `RenderableSystem` in charge of the `RenderableComponent` of the same entity sees the tile changed on the `PositionComponent`.

3. `RenderableSystem` updates the coordinates for the sprite of the entity on screen to match up with the new tile.

```typescript
class RenderableSystem {
    update (entities) {
        entities.forEeach(entity => {
            const positionState = getComponentForEntity(
                entity,
                Component.Position
            );
            // 2.
            if (positionState.currentTile !== positionState.previousTile) {
                const renderableState = getComponentForEntity(
                    entity,
                    Component.Renderable
                );
                // 3.
                renderableState.position = positionState.currentTile;
            }
        })
    }
}
```

This is a pretty basic example but it highlights a couple key things. First, it shows how systems operate on their components to produce changes in game. In this case the `RenderableSystem` updates the `RenderableComponent` and this causes the sprite to move on screen.

And second, it shows how a component's system can gather data from other components to update the state of components that they are in charge of. Here the `RenderableSystem` uses the state of an entity's `PositionState` to update that entity's `RenderableState`. More explicitly, while the `RenderableSystem` is in charge of updating the `RenderableComponent` it can use data from the entity's other components to update the `RenderableComponent`.

## Pros and Cons

### Pros
* Deterministic updates through (ideally, immutable) state
    * No reliance on confusing event bindings to detect mutations in state. Just update a component's value and check if the value has changed where you need to.
    * If you go a step further and make components immutable, [updates become easier to detect and less error prone](https://facebook.github.io/immutable-js/).
    * Consistent api for updating state of entities. With classes representing entities, the way to perform different updates may vary wildly depending on what you're doing. With ECS, it's always the same: get the component, update the component.
* Data-oriented design
    * Saving and loading information is easy because it’s just data.
    * Adding different types of existing entities can be as simple as adding a map with some strings and numbers in it. This means you don't need a programmer to add content to the game.
* ECS encourages isolated functionality
    * Since functionality is often isolated, when you go to update a piece of functionality you don't have to worry as much about your changes breaking other functionality.
* Not hindered by iterative development
    * ECS is quite flexible so you don’t need to plan out the entire game up front. This is as opposed to inheritance trees that become unwieldy as their size grows and new features are added.

### Cons
* Boilerplate
    * Every time I add a new component I have to update a bunch of lists and enums to have it be properly included in all the various pieces a part of the ECS framework. (This could probably be reduced if you're clever.)
* Can be expensive/inefficient if you’re lazy
    * You’ll have to be clever with how you organize your data structures so that you’re not iterating over every single entity linearly every turn.
    * Examples: systems iterating over only the entities they need to, systems only performing the updates they need to, data structures for fetching large groups of components efficiently, etc.
* Can be confusing at times
    * "Where do updates happen"/"Who’s in charge of what"? In the case of the `RenderableSystem` reading the `PositionComponent` and using it to update the `RenderableComponent`, it could have been done the opposite way i.e. the `PositionSystem` sees the tile was updated and then updates the `RenderableComponent` directly. It's unclear which is better so you'll have to rely on your experience and judgement.
    * "Who gets to touch what"? It seems clear to me that some components by necessity interact with other components. A `PoisonComponent` probably needs to interact with a `HealthComponent`. Other times it's unclear if components should be kept separate. Having interconnected components can break the isolation that's one of the benefits of using ECS.
    * What system goes before another? Order matters when calling `update` on Systems if you want deterministic code. If they are not called in the same order every time you cannot expect certain values to be updated consistently. For example it seems pretty clear that the system in charge of rendering should go last because you only want to update the screen when the engine has updated every other system.


While I'm sure everyone will have a different experience with ECS depending on their personal tastes as a programmer and the type of game they're working on, overall I've found ECS to be a godsend for Ripple's development. Being a simulation game with a lot of interacting systems it's been a huge help by focusing on isolating the various pieces of functionality. This is as opposed to my previous object-oriented approach where many classes covered many overlapping domains of functionality leading to confusion and bugs. On top of this, the flexibility of ECS has been a huge boon as I can easily introduce and try out new components and then get rid of them if they don't work out.
